---
desc: Baseline Magazine
title: Why JP Morgan Chase Really Dropped IBM
date: 2005-1-13
original: 'http://www.baselinemag.com/c/a/Projects-Management/Why-JP-Morgan-Chase-Really-Dropped-IBM/'
---

> Was Big Blue not doing its job? No. The bank's spending on technology was simply way out of line.


A little more than two years ago, JP Morgan Chase & Co. signed a $5
billion, seven-year agreement with ibm for computer services. Under
the outsourcing pact, 4,000 members of the bank's technology staff
would go over to ibm.

Twenty-one months later, in August 2004, the bank canceled the
contract. The outsourced employees would return at the start of this
year.

Why? The company's CIO, Austin Adams, said at the time: "We believe
managing our own technology infrastructure is best for the long-term
growth and success of our company ... to become more efficient."

What really changed things was the July 2004 merger of JP Morgan
Chase with Bank One, which had gained a reputation for consolidating
data centers and eliminating thousands of computer applications. JP
Morgan Chase would now switch from IBM to self-sufficiency to take
advantage of BankOne's cost-cutting know-how.

Bank One has to date delivered a remarkable performance. The bank
reduced head count 12% from 2000 to 2003, while raising revenue 17% to
$16.2 billion. By contrast, JP Morgan Chase reduced its head count
only 6% in the same period while revenues grew just 1%, to $33.3
billion from $32.9 billion.

For further comparison, the average compensation of a Bank One
employee in 2003 was $66,928; a JP Morgan Chase employee took home
$125,147. Returns on shareholder equity also were materially higher
for Bank One.

The more cost-efficient Bank One then swallowed the underperforming
JP Morgan Chase. Bank One also reaped a 14.5% gain in the appreciation
of its stock. Executives of the consolidated firm called for at least
$2.2 billion in annual cost savings to justify the expense of the
merger.

Which goes a long way toward explaining why JP Morgan Chase brought
its computing back in-house. It's not because IBM was not doing its
job. In-house management of a technology infrastructure is unlikely to
be more efficient than that delivered by a well-run global information
"utility" with ample capital for technical innovation, reliability and
load sharing.

No, the objective was to perform radical surgery on the unfavorable
economics of JP Morgan Chase. From 1999 to 2003, the bank's
shareholders got a return on their investment of 9.45% a year. By
comparison, shareholders at Bank of America, Citicorp, Wachovia and
Wells Fargo got an average return on investment of 15.79%. JP Morgan
Chase's average compensation per employee was twice that of the other
banks. And its spending on technology, per employee, was more than
double, at roughly $28,300 a head, compared with $12,700.

### How much cost cutting should JP Morgan Chase do?

Banks include their technology expenses in their audited financial
statements. In the case of JP Morgan Chase, theses expenses grew from
$2.18 billion in 1999 to $2.84 billion in 2003.

Comparable data was obtained for Bank of America, Citicorp, US
Bancorp, Wachovia, Wells Fargo and other banks. A model that
"explains" the banks' I.T. spending levels after taking into
consideration how the banks differ in revenue, profit, salaries,
assets and head count was then constructed (see "Estimating
I.T. Spending for Banks," go.baselinemag.com/jan05).

Compared to 30 other technology budgets (i.e., five years of data
for each of the six banks), JP Morgan Chase should be spending $2.11
billion -- in 2003. Its spending should not be any higher than in
1999.

Only a drastic restructuring in the bank's organization can reduce
that huge disparity. One step is to cut way back on technology
spending, whether to ibm or to an in-house staff. Or both. In any
case, the bank's own excessive spending is what really doomed the ibm
outsourcing contract.


### Cost Comparison

When JP Morgan Chase looked at itself in the mirror, it saw excess spending.


<table cellpadding="4" cellspacing="1">
<tr bgcolor="#F7F7E9" align="left">
  <th>MEDIAN VALUES 1999-2003</th>
  <th>I.T. spending per employee</th>
  <th>Compensation per employee</th>
  <th>Return on shareholder equity</th></tr>
<tr bgcolor="#e0e0e0">
  <td>Bank of America, Citicorp, Wells&nbsp;Fargo, Wachovia</td>
  <td>$12,729</td>
  <td>$55,057</td>
  <td>15.79%</td></tr>
<tr bgcolor="#F7F7E9">
  <td>JP Morgan Chase</td>
  <td>$28,297</td>
  <td>$110,702</td>
  <td>9.45%</td></tr>
</table>


*Source: Strassmann Inc.*



> Paul Strassmann created and trademarked the Information Value-Added and
> Information Productivity formulas behind the Baseline 500
> rankings. His career in technology, which began in 1956, includes
> stints as a top information-technology executive at Xerox, General
> Foods, Kraft, the Department of Defense and NASA.
>
> Strassmann is president of The Information Economics Press and senior
> advisor to Science Applications International Corp., he is also
> Distinguished Professor of Information Sciences at George Mason
> University's School of Information Technology and Engineering.
>
> He has written numerous articles and books on information management,
> including Information Payoff: The Transformation of Work in the
> Electronic Age (1985) and The Squandered Computer (1998).
