---
title: How to Value Information Security Risks
date: 2001-2
desc: Knowledge Management Magazine
---

![cover art](0201-cover.jpg)

> Knowledge capital is the most important asset that companies must protect


As I have noted before, most of a corporation's wealth is reflected
not in its accounting records but in the valuations of knowledge
capital (for discussions of this topic, see "Knowledge Metrics,"
September and October 1999 <I>KMM)</I>. For more than 90 percent of
U.S. corporations, this asset is greater than the financial assets
that they report in audited financial statements. Yet conventional
accounting methods, as defined by the accounting "book value," cannot
measure it. Knowledge is embodied chiefly in the behavior of
employees.

The information that exists on computer systems is of course
important, but it is of less significance than knowledge. Damage to
information is inflicted almost entirely by human actions and rarely
by equipment failures. It is the combination of human and
technological risks that we must take into account when considering
what information security is all about.

One of the greatest challenges for information security professionals
is to determine how to protect the corporate wealth embodied in
knowledge. It is therefore useful to estimate the value of this
knowledge capital prior to applying security measures. Such valuations
should make it easier to explain and justify budget requests for added
information security.

In this context, what matters most is the difference between the worth
of a company as expressed by its book value and its total economic
worth. Unfortunately, many observers view this difference only in
terms of stock market multiples. Though such a measure may be useful
for making stock-trading decisions, from the standpoint of information
security it has little merit. The daily fluctuations in the price of
shares offer little guidance for judging the persistence of
information risks. Therefore, the proper mission of information
security is to guard against risks that are not controlled by existing
financial, accounting, engineering, administrative or insurance
measures.


### A useful metric

It is reasonable to think of information security as an additional
form of property insurance. When contracting for an insurance policy,
the worth of the insured property must be determined before discussing
the amounts of insurance premiums the owner can afford. The worth of
an asset also influences the type of coverage one should obtain. When
evaluating the worth of information security, the use of knowledge
capital metrics makes it possible to rank the probable impact of
losses in consistent dollar terms.

I have found the ratio of knowledge capital per employee to be the
most practical indicator for identifying the scope of potential
information security risks. Companies with high levels of knowledge
capital per employee are at greater risk for losses and thus become
candidates for information security countermeasures that can offer
enhanced protection.

The knowledge capital per employee indicator is also valuable in
setting information security priorities, such as when decisions are
made to allocate funds for risk-reduction projects. An example of such
an assessment is shown in the table "Plenty of Knowledge Capital,"
which offers a sample of corporations that show some of the highest
knowledge capital per employee ratios in the U.S. (based on averages
from 1997 through 1999).

The figure for the average knowledge capital per employee should be
used only as an approximation when performing an information security
assessment. Within any enterprise, the contribution of different
occupational groups to information risks will vary. In almost all
cases, though, risks are concentrated in relatively few employees.

Information security measures are arduous, and executives and
rank-and-file habitually see them as interfering with the efficient
conduct of business. Consequently, the actual implementation of
information security policies will be the outcome of compromises that
frequently reflect behavioral concerns instead of the magnitude of the
risks.

Major security exposures are always specific and are concentrated in a
few critical spots. Hazards should not be managed by relying primarily
on the application of uniform "best practices" to everybody's
behavior. Using the indicator of knowledge capital per employee as a
policy-making tool will help by focusing security practices where they
can offer the greatest value.



> Paul A. Strassmann originated the trademarked concepts "information
> productivity", "return-on-management" and "knowledge capital."
