---
title: "Monkey Spectacles: An Allegorical Tale"
desc: Cutter IT Journal
date: 1997-8-2
original: "https://www.cutter.com/article/monkey-spectacles-allegorical-tale-406426"
---

Long, long ago, in a distant land, a brilliant bunch of chimpanzees
discovered a new and luscious fruit. The only problem was that it was
hard to see and therefore to collect. So, one of them fixed up
spectacles that made the fruit easily identifiable to the gatherers.

## The Fruit Picking Business

As the demand for the fruit grew, an enterprising poker-playing
gorilla perfected lenses that could fit anybody's frames. The business
growth was fantastic. The gorilla prospered by offering increasingly
complex lenses, now covering even eye-brows (browsers) and marketed
them under the Fenestra brand name using techniques that were
previously well tested in advertising soap and diapers to fastidious
primates.

In due course, the inexorable laws of diminishing returns kicked
in. The demand for spectacles remained concentrated among the more
prosperous apes. They found that increasingly they were spending less
on spectacles than on cookbooks, gas grills, exotic spices and
napkins. Other jungle dwellers, would like to eat too, but could not
afford all of the gourmet paraphernalia.

## Pursuit of Other Options

To meet the expectations of the shareholders that the monkey business
would continue growing at the accustomed rates, Fenestra attempted
diversification, such as getting into the soft lens (microlensoft),
microscope and telescope business. They even ventured into
kaleidoscopes for delivering naughty pictures. None of these proved to
be big money makers.

As the long-term prospects for the lens business dimmed an economist
figured out that a diminishing share of the Total Cost of Eating would
be paid out for fruit gathering. Most of the money would go for
kitchen accessories, repairs of fragile optics and time wasted picking
up broken cooking utensils. In response to the changing economics,
clever Fenesterians, now a bunch of eight-hundred pound gorillas,
figured out that there was a way of coating lenses so that monkeys
would not be able to harvest, shop, cook, eat or even take a siesta
without a permanent vision-enhancement attachment to their cranial
cavity. That simple solution offered a sure prospect of continued
infinite growth.

## A Historical Lesson

Looking back a the history of monkey spectacles, one can now think
about the prospects of cranial control dispassionately. Though
deteriorating eyesight of the jungle population continued to generate
sustained demand for spectacles, factory-canned and pre-cooked fruit
in ready-to-eat portions, prepared by low-wage baboons ultimately took
over most of the market. The chefs and their guests also feared the
enormous power held by the lens makers. Wearing spectacles while
harvesting was OK, but surely not as a permanent fixture while engaged
in every other conceivable activity.

Because of technological obsolescence and inability to meet customer
apprehensions, the spectacles business reverted in due course to good,
but not extraordinary profits. When that happened, another tribe of
chimps immediately set out in search of another insanely great
technology to peddle to jungle inhabitants.

## Applicability to Microsoft

My monkey tale offers perhaps some illumination about the prospects of
Microsoft, which Ed Yourdon has asked to contemplate for this issue of
the magazine.

Rather than to speculate, I would like to leave the readers with the
following facts and observations which will explain why the Microsoft
business is like the monkey business:

1.  At a compound rate of revenue and profit growth of 46% and 51%
percent respectively, Microsoft's profits would rise to $136 billion,
or about one third of all profits earned by over 3,000 largest US
Corporations in 1996.  This projection of Microsoft financial
performance, for the next ten years, is based on 1996 growth
rates. Ecologically it would be unreasonable to expect that monkeys
can displace a large population of other animals.

If that happens, Microsoft's revenues would be equal to three quarters
of the combined global revenues of General Motors, Ford, Chrysler,
Honda and Toyota in 1996.  Is it conceivable that Microsoft could
attain such goals by selling only operating systems and PC
applications? Monkeys cannot grow bigger than elephants.

2. The projected global IT spending - including facilities, hardware,
software, services and staff - will grow at a compound annual rate of
8.4%, from $1.5 trillion in 1997 to $2 trillion in 2002. Since most of
the growth will be in staff and services, the relative importance of
packaged software - where Microsoft is dominant - will continue
declining. The current torrid Microsoft revenue growth rates are
unlikely to be sustainable. Monkey fruit cannot grow seven times
faster than the trees it grows on.

3. The global I.T. spending continues to be concentrated: just 10
countries account for 85% of all worldwide IT-related spending. This
includes the U.S., Japan, Germany, France, the U.K., Canada, Italy,
Australia, the Netherlands and Brazil. The growth rate in
I.T. spending in these countries is slowing down. Although the growth
rates in other countries, and especially in less developed lands, is
well above the present global average, their importance is not
sufficient to boost the average. Monkey food does not grow on all
trees, just a few ones, which are already well harvested.

4. The fastest growing segment of I.T. - network computing - is even
more concentrated in the USA where the Y2000 budget pressures and
Network Computer cost reductions do not herald well for the lucrative
market where Microsoft has reigned so far. It is noteworthy that 65%
of all Internet network nodes are presently in the USA and more than
half of the Y2000 expenses will be incurred here. It's like what
happens when the principal customers for monkey fruit, the orangutans,
are occupied in fixing their shelters.

5. The Total Cost of Ownership of a "fat" client - if you include the
cost of lost productivity and potential lost revenue for a typical
Windows installation - is now well over $12,000 per year. That assumes
operator salary of $32,000 per annum. For a "mission critical" NT/Win
combination, with a monthly downtime of up to three hours, and a fully
loaded user cost of $90,000, the Total Cost of Ownership is close to
$30,000.  Microsoft is presently eligible to receive only about 4% of
that. Monkey fruit is delicious, but not any more a large item in the
food budget.

## Microsoft Prospects

Microsoft has no other choice now but to diversify. Whether it can
make up its profit projections from entertainment and becoming a
contents provider, remains to be seen. So far their accomplishments
are not impressive. The media are an extremely competitive business,
with no dominant players and quickly shifting fortunes. Big spenders
who earned money in electronics and tried to break into entertainment
have all been losers.

Microsoft can not support its current stratospheric stock price, which
already discounts future profits at past growth rates. Therefore, the
only avenue open to Microsoft is to get a share of the customer's
potential savings from reductions in the present exorbitant costs of
network computing.

## An Outsourcing Option

There are two ways of accomplishing that objective, and there is every
indication that Microsoft is pursuing both. First, Microsoft will try
to substitute for the deplorable incompetence of most corporate "help
desks" which cannot cope with the increasing complexity of the
client/server configurations. Microsoft is now offering "incident"
assistance services at anywhere from a flat charge of $39.95 per
problem, to full support services of up to $10,000 per seat per year.
I call that outsourcing, though it may not be as profitable as selling
software, because it is labor intensive.

The incident assistance service is only one of many other conceivable
service options that are likely to be offered by Microsoft. This will
be an attractive source of revenue, especially as the complexity of
software or hardware maintenance surpasses the competence of on-site
experts.

## The Cranial Implant Option:

The second approach to revenue and profit enhancement is much more
promising, but more difficult to execute. What has been already
announced as the Zero Administration Initiative and heralded as the
"IntelliMirror" features for the next generation of Microsoft software
(NT5.0 and follow-on releases) is nothing more than Microsoft dealing
itself into a position of sharing a large chunk of the customer's
potential savings as they proceed with cutting back bloated desktop
costs. For all practical purposes this will require installing into
network control systems, desktop operating systems and application
software inextricable dependency hooks that will make Microsoft a
partner in whenever a customer may wish to do with computers. By means
of remotely executed diagnostic, maintenance, configuration control
and fault monitoring techniques more than a half of the current excess
network management costs will be eliminated. In return, Microsoft will
find ways of garnering some of these savings by means of innovative
on-line pricing methods, such as charging cybercash for transactions.

Such an omniscient and universal solution may be indeed what business
executives would desire as an escape from the current chaotic
conditions. If well executed and administered it may indeed by the
winning answer. However, if history teaches us anything, it is the
lesson that universal and monolithic solutions, when imposed from a
single source of a dominant authority, are doomed ultimately to
self-destruction. Corruption, rigidity and monopolistic arrogance will
always creep in. Therefore, any vendor who offers an all-encompassing
solution that aspires to totally dominate the marketplace, even if it
appears to benefit short term exigencies, will be always suspect of
offering counter-competitive answers.

## A Historian's Perspective

As happened in history many times before, all imperial ambitions will
be checked and countered by newly emerging competitors who cannot or
will not be co-opted by the dominant establishment. How this plot will
unfold for Microsoft is impossible to predict. One thing is sure: what
radical changes used to take centuries in the former millennium, and
decades in the 20th century, may take only years very soon.

If the pre-eminent pedestal on which Microsoft sits now can be upset
in a relatively short time, the only choice a technologist has now is
to opt for solutions that will survive any conceivable decline in the
overwhelming power Microsoft enjoys at present. There is no reason to
believe that Microsoft's current position differs from yet another
transient episode in the long history of human advances.
