---
title: Running IT Like A Business Could Lead to Technology Failure
author: Stephanie Overby
original: "http://www.cio.com/article/2439674/business-alignment/counterpoint--running-it-like-a-business-could-lead-to-technology-failure.html"
desc: CIO Magazine
date: 2004-5-1
---

> An obsession with running IT like a business could distract CIOs
> from technical operations, to their peril, says IT veteran Paul Strassmann.

"CIOs are missing the boat if they think running IT like a business
will solve all their problems," says Paul Strassmann, a 42-year
veteran of corporate and government IT and author of The Squandered
Computer.

That’s not to say that Strassmann doesn’t believe in the benefits of
running IT like a business. After all, he did just that at Xerox,
where he ran the company’s information services function as an
operating division from 1971 through 1994. When he was appointed to an
external task force by the U.S. secretary of defense in 1991 to
evaluate the Department of Defense’s IT organization, Strassmann
recommended recasting the Defense Information Services Agency as a
business.

Issuing P&L statements, benchmarking unit costs and offering
incentives for meeting performance goals, says Strassmann, can be
critical steps in achieving IT efficiency. And that’s what CIOs must
do if they plan to compete with external services providers. However,
he cautions, "you can be efficient -- but what happens if you’re doing
all the wrong things efficiently? That can happen very easily."

An obsession with running IT like a business could distract CIOs from
technical operations, to their peril, Strassmann says. CIOs must focus
on technical operations and "keep their nose to the grindstone. All
the [business discipline] in the world won’t go far if the executive
floor doesn’t get their paychecks [because of an IT mistake] or if the
e-mail system goes down." Success depends on maintaining a balance
between the technical and the strategic.

In the end, it’s likely CIOs will continue to struggle, whether or not
they run IT like a business, Strassmann concludes. CIO turnover was
just as bad last year as it was in 1995, according to his research,
and he doesn’t think businesslike IT will do much to increase CIO
tenure. "The life expectancy of a CIO is still about 30
months. Everyone is struggling, without exception. The turmoil has not
changed," says Strassmann. "Sometimes the changes you make in the IT
organization will work. And sometimes they won’t. There is no magic."
*-S.O.*
