---
title: Computer Snoopers Imperil Pentagon Files, Experts Say
desc: The New York Times
author: Peter H. Lewis
original: http://www.nytimes.com/1994/07/21/us/computer-snoopers-imperil-pentagon-files-experts-say.html
date: 1994-7-21
---

Armed with increasingly sophisticated snooping tools, unauthorized
computer programmers operating both in the United States and abroad
have gained access to hundreds of sensitive but unclassified
Government and military computer networks connected to the global
network Internet, computer security experts said.

"There is no information to indicate that command and control systems
were affected by these intrusions," a spokeswoman for the Defense
Information Systems Agency said Wednesday. Classified Government and
military data, like those that control nuclear weapons, intelligence
and other critical functions, are not connected to the Internet and
are believed to be secure.

But the agency acknowledged that the compromised computer systems
include those used for ballistic weapons research, aircraft and ship
design, military payroll, personnel records, procurement, modeling of
battlefield environments, and computer security research.

Information is placed on Internet computers to make it easier to be
shared by authorized users both within an organization and in remote
offices, say, between collaborating scientists at different Government
research labs, or between the Pentagon and its military contractors.

While most of the intruders appear to be hackers out for the computer
equivalent of a joyride, Federal investigators say that some of the
intruders have been able to take control of several military computer
systems, which enabled them to steal, alter or erase computer records,
even to shut the computer systems down.

"The problem is a very significant one," said Michael Higgins, deputy
director for information security at Defense Information Systems
Agency's Center for Information Systems Security. He added, "Such
intrusions are bound to continue because such information will be
passed along to other intruders."

The apparent ease with which hackers are entering military and
Government systems suggests that similar if not greater intrusions are
under way on corporate, academic and commercial networks connected to
the Internet. It also raises troubling questions about privacy and
data security.

Several sources said it was likely that only a small percentage of
intrusions, perhaps fewer than 5 percent, have been detected. Of those
that have been discovered, some are using advanced data encryption
techniques that prevent or hinder the military from discovering the
nature of the data that are being stolen.

"We've got real problems, and the problems have not been confined to
Government and military sites," said Eugene Spafford, an associate
professor of computer science at Purdue University who directs a
national computer security program.

In a private but unclassified briefing to a corporation recently,
Mr. Higgins of the Defense Information Systems Agency told executives
of a defense contractor that "major portions" of the Defense
Department's unclassified networks had been penetrated by hackers,
"adversely affecting D.O.D. military readiness."

Mr. Higgins's remarks were initially reported in the newspaper Federal
Computer Week and were confirmed by his office on Wednesday.

The break-ins have increased significantly since February, when the
Computer Emergency Response Team, a quasi-Government organization
financed by the Defense Department and based at Carnegie Mellon
University in Pittsburgh, issued an alarm that unknown intruders were
gathering tens of thousands of supposedly secret passwords that were
being transmitted from computer to computer on the global Internet.

Since then, security experts said, the number of captured passwords
has probably exceeded a million. 'Probably No Secure Systems'

Military investigators said "dozens of regional network service
providers" -- the main Internet hubs that service the majority of
American companies and individuals that use the Internet -- had been
successfully attacked.

"There are probably no secure systems on the Internet," said Peter
G. Neumann, principal scientist at SRI International, a think tank in
Menlo Park, Calif., formerly the Stanford Research Institute. "Some
are just administered better than others and are harder to break
into."

There are an estimated 2.2 million "host" computers on the Internet, which is used by more than 20 million people.

"I don't want to sound alarmist, but there is legitimate cause for
concern," said Scott C. Charney, chief of the computer crime unit in
the Justice Department's Criminal Division. "As we go toward greater
connectivity, and as more information is stored on the networks, the
risks go up proportionately." 'An Evil Web'

Most of the attacks appear to use a "sniffer" program that is
surreptitiously inserted into a computer. Each message passing through
the computer on its way around the global network contains the
sender's user identification, secret password and other information
needed to gain access to the destination computer. The sniffer program
captures virtually every authorized password and user ID passing
through the computer -- sometimes thousands a day -- and stores them
for retrieval later.

Later, using the pilfered ID's and passwords, the hackers can easily
gain access to Government, military, corporate and private computer
systems, where they plant more sniffers.

The vulnerabilities being exploited by sniffer programs were
discovered last summer, but it was not until February that attacks
became widespread enough to alarm Internet administrators. Since then,
the attacks have outpaced the abilities of security experts to detect
them.

Also, many of the attackers are clever programmers who can effectively make their programs invisible.

There are several security techniques that can block or discourage such attacks, but each requires making the networks less convenient for legitimate users. The cost to scan, repair and secure affected networks would vary from installation to installation, but would certainly be expensive, as would the installation of hardware and software mechanisms to prevent subsequent attacks.

Such schemes often involve the use of specially secured computer "firewalls" as buffers between a local network and the Internet. Other techniques include sophisticated password authenication systems and strong data encryption, which is hindered by the Government's policies restricting widespread use of encryption algorithms.

The easiest defense against the schemes is to change passwords
frequently, security advisers said. However, some "Trojan horse"
programs have been found that are programmed to detect attempts by
users to change their passwords, and then automatically capture the
new passwords, one investigator said.

"It's an evil web that we've weaved here," said James V. Christy 2d,
special agent and director of computer crime investigations for the
Air Force Office of Special Investigations at Bolling Air Force Base
in Washington, D.C. "You can have two completely secure sites, and
they could be doing everything right, but if they're communicating and
go through a system that isn't secure, they could be compromised."
Setting a Trap

Earlier this year, Air Force investigators helped New Scotland Yard in
England arrest a British computer programmer who was gathering data
from the Rome Air Development Center at Griffith Air Force Base in
upstate New York. The investigators set a trap for the hackers and
watched them operate on a Rome subnetwork for two weeks.

"In the past when we went in in a case like this, it was like going in
at night and turning on the light, and watching the roaches scatter,"
said Mr. Christy of the Air Force. "This time we basically went in at
night without turning on the lights, and with night vision goggles. It
was absolutely amazing where these guys went and what they were doing
and what they had access to."

"Besides compromising all our systems at Rome, they were going
downstream and attacking contractors and other Federal agencies,"
Mr. Christy said.

Mr. Christy said newer sniffers capture more than just the password
and ID, including contents of messages and files. In some cases, the
intruders are stealing so much data from Government and military
computers that they inadvertently overload and crash the systems, he
said. The Heart of the Issue

Paul Strassmann, a former principal assistant Secretary of Defense in
charge of Pentagon information systems, said: "When you're talking
about the national information highway, if you don't consider the
security dimension you really don't have anything. From a political
standpoint, the heart of the issue is security and privacy."

Without a cohesive Government data security policy, Mr. Strassmann
said, "We are exposing the world's first information-based society,
with 50 percent of the world's computing power and 70 percent of its
advanced software capability, to enormous dangers. This is the place
where the first information Chernobyl will happen."

Mr. Strassmann raised the specter of "information assassins," highly
skilled programmers who work for foreign governments, rival
corporations or organized crime, who exploit computer security
weaknesses to manipulate the stock market, hide drug-money
transactions, or destroy the data bases of financial institutions.

Most critical financial and military computer systems employ stringent
data security systems, including data encryption, sophisticated user
authentication, electronic firewalls and physically locked doors to
prevent unauthorized users from tapping into their systems.

"Everyone is looking at the bright promise of the National Information
Infrastructure and the Internet and connectivity as a whole, but they
are not looking at the flip side, that there are people coming onto
the net who don't have the same high ideals and goals, and who are
willing to abuse the rights of others," said Mr. Spafford, the
computer expert at Purdue. "I have likened it to selling swamp land in
Florida for vacation homes. There are a couple of details they neglect
to mention."

> Diagram (pg. B10)
