---
title: NASA tech chief defines new mission
original: 'https://fcw.com/articles/2002/08/05/nasa-tech-chief-defines-new-mission.aspx'
author: William Matthews
date: 2002-8-5
desc: Federal Computer Week
tags: FCW
---

NASA's acting chief information officer plans a dramatic overhaul of
the space agency's computer architecture that will create a single
agencywide system that is highly secure, tightly controlled and far
more responsive than the multiple systems the agency uses today.

Sixteen days after assuming CIO duties, Paul Strassmann described a
computer architecture managed by two highly secure "mission control
centers" so well wired that they "will know when anybody twitches on
the network."

In Strassmann's vision, NASA employees will need high-security smart
cards to access their office buildings and their computers.

The space agency will create an "information systems services utility"
that delivers "end-to-end computing services all the way down, not
only to the desktop, but also to the keystroke," Strassmann said
during a meeting with reporters Aug. 2.

"NASA has bought [into] the fundamental premise that the network is
the computer and the computers are just peripherals," Strassmann
said. The concept represents "a major reorientation of NASA to look at
21st century computing."

Strassmann said his plans would deliver "substantial savings" for
NASA, which now spends more than $1.5 billion a year on its computer
systems, although he did not specify the savings amount.

A key element of the planned information technology overhaul is
modeled after NASA's "major intellectual achievement" — mission
control, Strassmann said.

Using as a prototype the mission control centers — which remotely
manage the complex machinery of space flight — Strassmann said he
wants to build two identical mission control centers to manage NASA's
information systems.

Each center will have the help desks, security control, communication
availability and software and hardware configuration needed to run
NASA's computer systems worldwide, he said.

The mission control centers would operate around the clock and ideally
would have no more than 20 minutes of downtime a year. They would be
highly secure and hardened against terrorist and cyberterrorist
attacks, he said.

The idea would "take our experience from space and bring it to Earth,"
he said. "We believe NASA can provide a very exciting new view of
computing infrastructure for the 21st century for the federal
government."

A small-scale version of one center will be operational Oct. 15 at the
Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Ala.

The model is a radical departure from the norm in the computer
industry, where network control, security and support are typically
separate functions, he said.

Security is another key element to the IT overhaul. To establish the
"electronic identity of people," Strassmann wants to issue smart cards
to NASA employees, contractors and others associated with the
agency. The cards would include a computer chip with information about
the holder.

Much more stringent security and access control at NASA are essential,
he said. The agency is a constant target of hackers and possesses
"enormous intellectual property assets that [are] the envy of the
world" and must be protected.

The mission control centers will know when users are on the NASA
system and can disconnect them "in a microsecond," Strassmann said.

One of the first steps in the IT overhaul will be replacing 10
separate accounting systems with one, he added.

He rejected tying together legacy systems and instead plans to convert
existing financial records to a new format for a new, integrated
financial management system.

A reliable accounting system is considered critical to bringing fiscal
order to NASA, where a budget crunch is forcing curtailment of the
space station program and threatening other space missions, such as
sending exploratory craft to a moon of Jupiter and to Pluto.

IT is not a notable weakness at NASA, according to John Pike, head of
Global Security.org, which monitors space and military programs. But
at least one automated system — finance — needs reform.

"They need a financial management system that can catch million-dollar
cost overruns before they become billion- dollar cost overruns," he
said. Space station cost overruns of $4 billion "snuck up on them."

The agency has "squandered taxpayer dollars on finance systems that
aren't compatible and can't talk to each other," said Keith Cowing, a
former NASA employee who now edits the online publication NASA Watch.

But creating a centralized computer system may not improve NASA's
efficiency, he said. "They might spend more time watching people than
doing the job they're supposed to be doing."
