---
title: Out of Alignment
layout: post
author: Paul A. Strassmann
date: March 4, 2002
publication: <a href="http://computerworld.com">Computerworld</a>
category: Computerworld
---

I have always been amused by
simplistic methods offered to CIOs to answer complex questions
about the health of IT. One recent attempt is particularly noteworthy
because it received widespread publicity and reputable endorsements.
Last fall, a journal for CIOs published a five-page feature,
advertised as a diagnostic tool, with the ambitious title "How to
Improve IT/ Business Alignment." Introductory explanations claimed
that this technique was successfully tested with more than 25 Fortune
500 companies and used in studies sponsored by the Society for
Information Management and The Conference Board.

It required the placement of check marks on a grid consisting of five
columns and 38 lines representing 38 questions. A check mark in the
first column was worth one point, a mark in the second column two
points, and so forth, with five points for each mark in the fifth
column. A respondent could score anywhere from 38 to 190 points, with
a relatively high score signaling a high level of IT alignment with
the rest of the business. The proponents' assumption was that the
higher the score, the stronger the alignment, and therefore the more
benefits a business would see, which would ultimately be reflected in
its financial performance. For instance, if a CIO reported to the CFO,
that would be worth one point. If the CIO reported to the CEO, that
would be five points. "Rarely measuring the value of IT investments"
was worth one point, but using a balanced scorecard approach awarded
you five points. Other characteristics that were scored included
service-level agreements, how projects are prioritized and
architectural integration.

The publicity given to this methodology and its claims heightened my
curiosity about its value. As a scorekeeper of corporate profitability
and IT spending, I offered to test the tool's validity. The
researchers graciously provided me with each corporation's individual
score (subject to an agreement to not reveal the identities of the
firms or researchers).

My findings? After I compared the alignment scores with the actual
financial results delivered by the firms that were used to test the
methodology, I found absolutely no relationship between the overall
score and other independent measures of financial results. There were
high-scoring firms that were losing money, and there were low-scoring
firms that delivered exceptional profits. So the methodology failed in
perhaps its most important test of relevance to a board of directors.


I view that as an example of contemporary astrological practice as
applied to assessing IT excellence. Astrology, in which I take an
active interest, takes factual observations about stars, planets and
the calendar and converts them - by unverifiable methods - into
prophecies about events on Earth. I would classify any method for
cobbling together descriptions about IT-related practices into
predictions about IT excellence as being like astrology rather than an
application of reproducible analysis that can help IT.

### Executive Implications

I have seen many examples of methodologies that follow similar
patterns. Some are relatively modest and perhaps involve filling out a
grid. Others are ambitious, often asking that more than 150 line items
be scored via elaborate schema. This includes most of the measurements
of an organization's "maturity level." The widely applied balanced
scorecards disguise their astrological origins by arbitrary choices of
ratings criteria. For instance, one requirement to qualify a firm's
ranking of its computing innovation attributed 20% of that score to
whether it installed the latest version of Windows on all desktops!

All of these methods measure criteria that are mostly unrelated to top
executive concerns, which are primarily economic. In other words, CEOs
couldn't care less about conformity with what academia claims are
desirable behaviors. What they do care about is increasing
profitability and whether IT is helping to do that.

As IT management and budgets come under increasing scrutiny today,
don't bank on scoring well using astrologylike methods. Proving that
dollars saved and earned will add to the bottom line will count for
more.

---

<i>Paul A. Strassmann (<A
HREF="mailto:paul@strassmann.com">paul@strassmann.com</A>) believes
that astrologylike methods are popular ways to measure the health of
IT because they're cheap, don't require much effort and avoid
accountability.</i>


