---
title: For IT assurance, get some insurance
layout: post
author: Paul A. Strassmann
date: 1998-11-2
publication: <a href="http://computerworld.com">Computerworld</a>
category: Computerworld
---

The time has come for computer risk insurance. It will be one of the
most important innovations in information management, exceeding most
recent technological advances.

Insurance premiums may soon become a large component of every
organization's information technology budget.

Insurance is critically important for our civilization to function.
Without insurance, airplanes may not fly, automobiles must stay in the
garage, X-ray machines may shut down, chemical factories may close and
buildings may not get construction permits. Complex machinery and
facilities are insured because their risk of failure is widely
recognized and requires the protection insurance offers.

Insurance delivers social and economic value by asking the insured
parties to weigh the costs of potentially excessive premiums against
the exposure to losses. In this way, insurance puts in place a market
mechanism for judging a technology's reliability. In the absence of
insurance, government regulators and inspectors step in, often with
solutions that are worse than the situations they try to remedy.

Insurance is already available for business interruption risks from
year 2000 failures. If computers fail despite your best practices and
efforts, the insurance policy would cover damages in excess of a
deductible. There's no reason similar coverage can't apply to other
computing situations.

I believe business executives will be buying insurance for
computer-caused interruptions not only to minimize the losses, but
also for the added assurance it will give them about the
trustworthiness of their IT staffs. Operators of computer networks,
particularly those serving electronic commerce, will be required by
customers and their legal counsel to maintain third-party liability
and business interruption insurance coverage.

The simple fact is that risks from IT malfunctions now rank with
earthquakes (a mere $30 billion to $60 billion exposure) and
hurricanes (only $5 billion to $15 billion per incident) in potential
economic losses. If you also believe the various surveys that suggest
that more than 50% of all major computer projects experience material
cost and schedule overruns or get canceled, that chalks up untold
billions of dollars in losses suffered by organizations every year.

And if one contemplates various failure scenarios, such as a global
Internet-borne software plague or deliberate acts of information
terrorism, the financial damage estimates approach those from an
accident at a nuclear power plant.

### The Principle of Fortuity

Those who doubt whether it's possible to insure against computer risks
would be well served if they became better acquainted with the
underlying theory of insurability.

All insurability is based on the principle of "***fortuity***," which states
that a risk can't be insured when a loss is certain. Moreover, a risk
can't be insured if it could have been avoided by taking generally
known and easily available preventive measures. The principle of
fortuity shows that computer risks are insurable -- if practitioners
practice their craft in a more prudent manner. How then would fortuity
apply to the management of computers?

Companies pursuing overambitious and reckless projects, such as
massive, rapid, enterprise re-engineering projects, would find that
they aren't insurable. Firms that can demonstrate consistent delivery
of high-quality software and secure and reliable services will enjoy
lower insurance premiums -- and management will get an independent
confirmation that the IT staff isn't doing something foolish.

Projects with documentation of the precautions taken to protect
everyone affected by an information system would be insurable. That
would encourage IT managers to get their houses in order and
accumulate records of on-time, on-budget, secure and quality
results.

### Management Implications

The advent of computer risk insurance is likely to have an enormous
effect on the IT world -- both on corporate consumers and vendors of
information products. Software without warranties (whether in
shrink-wrapped packages or as part of a consulting product) will cease
to be viable. IT executives will have to comply with public standards
for systems development rather than improvise.

Information managers will have to think about the long-term impact of
their systems. Otherwise, they will fall prey to the long memories of
litigation lawyers who will try to do their best to demonstrate
negligence -- not fortuity.


---

[Strassmann](mailto:ceo@stacorp.com) is betting on insurance as the
lever for making the value of software quality a measurable benefit.
